# Project 4: Mail certificates on MacOS

Link to Git repo: https://github.com/nvdg2/CSA4-mail
Link to previous pki project: https://github.com/kelvin-ap/CSA-PKI

## Team Members

- Jasper Van Meel
- Dante Requena
- Kelvin Bogaerts
- Niels Van De Ginste
- Tom Goedemé

## Introduction

As expansion on the previous PKI project, we added an extra functionality: signing of X509 certificates for use of mail certificates on MacOS Mail clients.
These certificates have the following paramaters:

- keyUsage: contentCommitment,digitalSignature, keyEncipherment
- keyExtUsage: MailProtection

## 1. Deploying

### `step ca init`

- Before deploying the flake, run `step ca init` on the server
  - Pick `standalone` & choose a name for the PKI. The only things that really matter here are the **name of the PKI** and the **password of the CA keys** (last option), just enter the examples for the other options.
  - All the other options will be overwritten by the config in the flake, but the flake does not generate the initial certificate files - that's why you have to run `step ca init`.
- Now run the following commands as root - assuming the `.step` directory generated by `step ca init` is in `/root/.step`:

```bash
mkdir -p /var/data/step-ca
# copy certs & secrets to /var/data/step-ca
cp -r /root/.step/certs/ /root/.step/secrets/ /var/data/step-ca/
# set ownership
chown -R step-ca /var/data/step-ca
```

### Flake configuration

- Use `agenix -e <file.age>` to edit the secret files, make sure that the secrets in the `step-server` directory of the flake contain the correct values:
  - `step.age` -> password to decrypt the root CA key (the password entered during `step ca init`)
  - `domain.age` -> domain on which the CA can be reached (make sure to configure an A/AAAA record in your DNS server)
  - `address.age` -> public IP address on which the CA server should listen (only address, no port)
- You could also put the domain & address into the flake directly. However, don't do this with the password, since contents of flake files are copied to the world-readable Nix store folder.
- Make sure the public key of the CA server is listed in `secrets.nix` so that it can decrypt the secrets
  - Find the public key of the server by running `ssh-keyscan <IP>`
- Make sure that **your** public key is listed under `users.users.root.openssh.authorizedKeys.keys` so that you can log in

## 2. Configuring Step-CA

- [Here](https://smallstep.com/docs/step-ca/configuration/#basic-configuration-options) you can find a list of all the configuration options.
- Configure the `X5C` provisioner for requesting X.509 certificates:

```nix
provisioners = [
  {
    type = "X5C";
    name = "x5c";
    roots = "LS0tLS1CRUdJ[...]yO0tR5EIUlRJRklDQVRLS0tLS0K";
    options.x509.template = ''{"subject": {{ toJson .Subject }},"sans": {{ toJson .SANs }},"keyUsage": ["contentCommitment","digitalSignature","keyEncipherment"],"extKeyUsage": ["emailProtection"]}'';
  }
];
```

- Note: the value of `roots` should be a **base64 encoded list of root certificate PEM blocks** used for validating X5C tokens
  - The X5C provisioner allows a client to authenticate a certificate request using an existing X.509 certificate from a different CA. For ease of use, we configured the X509 provider to trust its own root certificate. **This is NOT   recommended**, since anyone with a valid certificate from the CA can subsequently request any kind of certificate.
  - More information: https://smallstep.com/docs/step-ca/provisioners/#x5c---x509-certificate

- The template configured with `options.x509.template` will make sure that the `keyUsage` and `extKeyUsage` fields are set to the correct values for email signing & encryption. You can find more information about templates in the [official documentation](https://smallstep.com/docs/step-ca/templates/#x509-templates).

- Optionally modify the claims configuration, this was modified mainly to make sure that our certificates last longer than the default 24 hours:

```nix
claims = {
  minTLSCertDuration = "24h";
  maxTLSCertDuration = "8760h";
  defaultTLSCertDuration = "8760h";
};
```

## 4. Generating mail certificats V2

Step 1: use the following json file as template for a provisioner and create the template.plt file:

```json
{
    "subject": {
        { toJson .Subject
        }
    },
    "sans": {
        { toJson .SANs
        }
    },
    "keyUsage": [
        "contentCommitment",
        "digitalSignature",
        "keyEncipherment"
    ],
    "extKeyUsage": [
        "emailProtection"
    ]
}
```

Step 2. Use the following command to create the mail certificate provisioner.

```bash
# request a new certificate using the leaf certificate generated by the previous command
step ca provisioner add [name of jwk provisioner] --type jwk --x509-template template.plt --create --ca-url [url of ca]
```

After the command has been executed, the CA will ask for some info:

- Enter the pass for the provisioner private key.
- When the ca asks for admin user credentials: user=step and password=[your step ca pass]

Step 3: Run the follwoing command to request a signature for your MacOS CSR file.

```bash
# request a new certificate using the leaf certificate generated by the previous command
step-cli ca sign [signing request name].csr [certificate name].crt --ca-url [url of ca]
```

Choose your newly generated provisioner to sign the certificate and enter the pass of your JWT provisoner private key
